bn-e-Safi (26 July 1928 – 26 July 1980) (also spelled as Ibne Safi) was the pen name of Asrar Ahmad ,a fiction writer, novelist and poet of Urdu from Pakistan. The word Ibn-e-Safi is a Persian expression which literally means Son of Safi, where the word Safi means chaste or righteous. He first wrote from the British India of the 1940s, and later Pakistan after the independence of British India in 1947.[1][2]

His main works were the 125-book series Jasoosi Dunya (The Spy World) and the 120-book Imran Series, with a small canon of satirical works and poetry. His novels were characterised by a blend of mystery, adventure, suspense, violence, romance and comedy, achieving massive popularity across a broad readership in South Asia.[3][4]

Biography
Early life and education
Asrar Ahmad was born on 26 July 1928 in the town 'Nara' of district Allahabad, India. His father's name was Safiullah and mother's name was Naziran Bibi.[2][4][1] His ancestors were Hindus of the Kayashta community, specialised in the fields of education and administration, who converted to Islam many generations ago.[5]

He received a Bachelor of Arts degree from Agra University.[4] In 1948, he started his first job at 'Nikhat Publications' as an editor in the poetry department. His initial works date back to the early 1940s, when he wrote from British India. He also studied at the University of Allahabad where he was class fellow of Professor Mohammad Uzair and one year senior to Mustafa Zaidi [1]. After the independence of India and Pakistan in 1947, he began writing novels in the early 1950s while working as a secondary school teacher and continuing part-time studies. After completing the latter, having attracted official attention as being subversive in the independence and post-independence period, he migrated to Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan in August 1952. He started his own company by the name 'Asrar Publications'.[6][3]

Later life
He married Umme Salma Khatoon in 1953.[4] In the period from 1960 to 1963, he suffered an episode of severe depression and spent some time in the psychiatry ward of a hospital, but recovered, and returned with a best-selling Imran Series novel, Dairrh Matwaalay (One and a half amused) which was published in India by the to-be -Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri.[7][8] In fact, he wrote 36 novels of 'Jasoosi Duniya' and 79 novels of 'Imran Series' after his recovery from depression. In the 1970s, he informally advised the Inter-Services Intelligence of Pakistan on methods of detection.[4][9]

Death
Ibne Safi died on 26 July 1980 of pancreatic cancer at age 52. He was buried in Paposhnagar graveyard in Karachi.[4][10]

Literary career
Early attempts
Ibn-e-Safi started writing poetry in his childhood and soon earned critical acclaim in whole South-Asian community. After completing his Bachelor of Arts, he started writing short stories, humour and satire under various names such as "Siniki (Cynic) Soldier" and "Tughral Farghan." In the Nakhat magazines, he published several satirical articles which commented on various topics ranging from politics to literature to journalism. His early works in the 1940s included short stories, humour and satire.[4]

Jasoosi Dunya and Imran Series
According to one of his autobiographical essays, someone at a literary meeting claimed that Urdu literature had little scope beyond sexual themes. To challenge this notion, Ibn-e-Safi began writing several detective stories in January 1952. These were published in the monthly digest, Nikhat, under the series name Jasoosi Dunya. In 1953, Ibn-e-Safi, along with his mother and sister, moved to Karachi, Pakistan, joining his father who had migrated there earlier in 1947.[2][4]

In 1955, Ibn-e-Safi started the Imran Series, which gained as much fame and success as Jasoosi Dunya. Ibne Safi's novels – characterised by a blend of adventure, suspense, violence, romance, and comedy – achieved massive popularity by a broad readership.[3][2]

Ibne Safi is the best writer of Imran Series and Jasoosi Dunya and creator of both the series.

Many a time, Ibne Safi created fictitious settings for his stories. The magical web of his writing is so captivating that these fantasy lands have become real in the minds of readers. Avid fans of the author are experts on the people and cultures of Shakraal, Karaghaal, Maqlaaq, Zeroland, and many other imaginary domains. In cities around India and Pakistan, one can find discothèques, bars, nightclubs, and hotels named after venues found in Ibne Safi's novels. Some places worth mentioning are Dilkusha, Figaro, Niagara, Tip Top, High Circle.[2]

Other works
Besides humor and satire, he also wrote some short adventures, namely Baldraan Ki Malika (The Queen of Baldraan), Ab Tak Thee Kahaan? (Where had you been?), Shumal Ka Fitna (The Trouble from North), Gultarang, and Moaziz Khopri. In these adventures, Ibne Safi takes the reader to various fictitious, exotic lands of his own imagination.

In 1959, Ibne Safi started writing Aadmi Ki Jarain, a book based on human psychology. However, it remained incomplete due to his illness.

Dhamaka – A film by Ibn-e-Safi
Ibne Safi wrote the story and screenplay for a film 'Dhamaka' based on his novel 'Bebakon ki talash'. The film did not get the publicity and fame which it deserved and remains mostly forgotten.

"Dhamaka" was produced by Muhammad Hussain Talpur, based on the Imran Series novel Baibaakon Ki Talaash (Urdu for (In Search of the Outreageous). Pakistani film actor Javed Sheikh (then known as Javaid Iqbal) was introduced as Zafarul Mulk, the lead role in the film. Muhammad Hussain Talpur (film producer) played the role of Jameson and actress Shabnam played the role of Sabiha. Imran and X-2's team was not shown in the movie. The voice of X-2 was recorded by Ibne Safi himself. Actor Rehman played the role of a villain for the first time. The film featured a rendition of a ghazal by the singer Habib Wali Mohammed, "Rah-e-talab mein kaun kisi ka", which was written by Ibn-e-Safi. The movie was released on 13 December 1974.

Reception
Influence
The Bollywood screenwriter and lyricist Javed Akhtar was greatly inspired by Ibn-e-Safi's Urdu novels, which he grew up reading as a child. Akhtar was particularly influenced by the Jasoosi Dunya and Imran series of detective novels, such as The House of Fear (1955). He was influenced by the fast action, tight plots and economies of expression in the Jasoosi Dunya detective thrillers. He also remembered Ibn-e-Safi's novels for their fascinating characters with catchy memorable names, which left a lasting impression on Akhtar, whose Bollywood scripts later employed some of Ibn-e-Safi's narrative techniques, such as giving catchy names to the characters, his sense of plot, and speaking styles.[11] Akhtar said that Ibn-e-Safi's novels taught him the importance of larger-than-life characters, inspiring famous Bollywood characters such as Gabbar Singh in film Sholay (1975) and Mogambo in Mr. India (1987).[12]

Translations
The first English translations of Ibne Safi's mystery novels began appearing in 2010, with The House of Fear from the Imraan Series, translated by Bilal Tanweer and published by Random House India.[13] In 2011, Blaft Publications in association with Tranquebar released four more novels, this time from the Jasoosi Duniya series, translated by the highly acclaimed Urdu critic Shamsur Rahman Faruqi.[3][1][10]